% $Log: abstract.tex,v $
% Revision 1.1  93/05/14  14:56:25  starflt
% Initial revision
% 
% Revision 1.1  90/05/04  10:41:01  lwvanels
% Initial revision
% 
%
%% The text of your abstract and nothing else (other than comments) goes here.
%% It will be single-spaced and the rest of the text that is supposed to go on
%% the abstract page will be generated by the abstractpage environment.  This
%% file should be \input (not \include 'd) from cover.tex.
Historically, the evolution of network routers was driven primarily by
performance. Recently, owing to the need for better control over network
operations and the constant demand for new features, programmability of routers
has become as important as performance.  However, today's fastest routers,
which support aggregate capacities between several hundred Gbit/s and a few
Tbit/s (10--100 ports each running at a line rate of 10--100 Gbit/s), use
fixed-function hardware, which cannot be modified after deployment. This
disseration will describe three router hardware primitives and their
corresponding programming models in software that allow network operators to
program specific classes of router functionality on such fast routers.

First, we develop a system for programming stateful packet-processing
algorithms such as algorithms for in-network congestion control, buffer
management, and data-plane traffic engineering. The challenge here is the fact
that these algorithms maintain and update state on the router.  We develop a
small but expressive instruction set for stateful manipulation on fast routers,
and then expose this to the programmer through a high-level programming model
and compiler.

Second, we develop a system to program packet scheduling: the task of picking
which packet to transmit next on a link. Our main contribution here is the
finding that many packet scheduling algorithms can be programmed using one
simple idea: a priority queue of packets in hardware coupled with a software
program to assign each packet's priority in the priority queue.

Third, we develop a system for programmable and scalable measurement of network
statistics on a per-flow basis. Our goal is allow programmers to flexibly
define what they want to measure while scaling to a large number of flows. We
formally characterize a broad class of statistics measurements for which a
scalable implementation is possible. This class includes many useful statistics
such as a moving average filter over packet latencies on a per-flow basis,
counters, and counters that are conditionally incremented.

Together, these systems demonstrate that it is possible to program several
packet-processing functions on fast routers for the first time, such as
in-network congestion control, active queue management, data-plane load
balancing, network measurement, and packet scheduling.

Based on these three systems, we distill two lessons for designing fast and
programmable routers in the future. First, specializing our designs to
programming specific classes of router functionality significantly improves
performance (by 10x or more) relative to a general-purpose solution that can
program any router functionality. Second, jointly designing hardware and
software provides us with more leverage than designing either in isolation.
